---
title: "The meaning of life for a software professional"
excerpt: My search toward growing and contribution "
tags: 
  - story
  - meaning of life
  - lingostand
  - software
author: ernesto

---

I want to talk about the meaning of life, about how I'm working towards finding it through my work and to share my journey. Hopefully, it helps someone in some unforeseen way, worst case it helps me explore myself.

My wife and I have run a small Software Consulting Development company for years, but we are in transition to becoming an Independent Software development company or studio. 

I'm of course much more complex than a software developer tag, consultant, programmer, etc... just like you are much more complex than your professional tag. 

I'm also a book addict, specially self-help book addict, especially to practical books...  I really like testable information. Read, analyze, test, do it again.

Something I like about software and self-help books is how both can change the current course of your life. For me, the code in both sources contains real magic, assuming they posses real value.

I can read a book, and if it's the right book at the right time it can transform my life forever. 

To accomplish this, I need to take the time to read it slowly, allowing the information to take a hold a little each day in me, like a plant you water and it slowly starts to grow, changing my thoughts, my believes, my habits and finally my circumstances. They can be a transformative experience.

Take Allen Carr's Easy Way to Stop Smoking for example, man talk about a good investment!! I smoked a lot since I was 15 years old up to 36, and the few attempts I had made of quitting were pathetic. A few months and then I was back. After reading that book a bit each day, I developed a complete rejection for a cigarette. 2 years have passed and I can't stand the smell of it, I respond to it like a non-smoker kid. 

It is one thing to fight a bad habit with willpower "one day at the time", and another one entirely to re-write your programming to reject it not needing willpower at all. You just can't stand the smell. What did the book say? What was the revolutionary message? Smoking is bad for you health, your economy, your self confidence... etc... I had offcourse heard the messages before, but it was written is such a way that if you consumed about 30 minutes each day of the book, by the end of it I really belived the message, it was part of my unconscious. At some point in the reading and then experimenting my life something clicked, I made a desicion, and from that instant I felt a rejection for cigarettes. 

Another practical example is John Sarno's Healing Back Pain book. I had a recurrent and very painful back spasms since 2012 until May 2017. Every 2 or 3 months my back got stiff, and every move in any direction was a world of pain. If I layed out and took anti-inflammatory medicine, in the course of a week I would be able to move again and pretend that nothing happened and I was ok. The first time I got it I was doing longboarding in Caracas and suddenly PAF... had to sit on the sidewalk and walk back home moving like a robot. 

I did not want to go to the doctors, I was afraid they would give the pain a name and made the problem permanent. I've lost many outdoors activities buddies due to back pain diagnosis. Doctors do the best they can generally, but I learned through experience that an error in the diagnosis can condition and even create an issue.

Read the book in May 2017 after a very shameful episode at the CrossFit box, again a few pages each day, and well, no more episodes until now (November 2018). Again, abut 30 minutes a day, my thoughs started to change, the pain started to change slowly, until one day I made a life desicion and started to act accordingly and the pain was gone (turns out having internal conflicts causes all kinds of physicall pains).

I could go on and on about all these books, and how they are continually shaping my life, but let's focus on the main subject of this message: Meaning of Life. And for that, I'll reference a book that contains something very special: Viktor Frankl's Man's Search for Meaning.

As I said I favor tested practical content above theorists, and this one is tested in one of the most extreme environments ever produced in the history of mankind... Hitler's concentration camps. 

The fact that the author (who was one of the prisoners) illustrated in crude hardcore HD that physically strong people had far less chance of survival than educated people who were able to give their life meaning baffled me.

The story of how people, when lost meaning entered a recognizable state that inevitably leads to death, made me wonder for days.

But one of the most incredible lesson was, that the meaning in your life is something you have to give to yourself. You have to make it up, make your own story, or borrow someone else's and adjust it, do what you need to do to fabricate your reason to be in the world and then believe it, really believe it. And if you do, you will have a clear goal, and lot's of energy to accomplish it.

You will find solutions to problems, and grow stronger as your solve them. One thing I got from Victor Frankling is that those who had meaning not only survived the concentration camps, but they were able to have a full life afterwards. They did not turn to the dark side, but were able to have a good life themselves and contribute making the world better.

Makes sense, I though, if you think about it. We are constantly making up stories to ourselves. Think about history's highlighted characters, those that seem to have a driving force beyond human. 

Take for example Magallanes and his crew, these guys actually did go around the world for the first time in history with equipments that shouldn't have worked! First to America crossing the Atlantic, then discovered el canal de Magallanes mainly through believing that it existed without any proove, and then went and crossed the Pacific which was 3 times the lenght!! Compare them with todays astronauts that can pre plan the course... not taking anything out of our astronauts, I find them incredible, but they do have a bunch of thing estimated.

It's not even important how big or important to others is this meaning, it only matters how big or important it is for you. Your world is what it's really important. Viktor Frankl talked about people who's meaning was taking care of their son, sharing time with his partner, or helping a friend that was in the camp. Others like Viktor were able to create more meaning, as a neurologist and psychiatrist, he saw himself comunicating the message of healing through meaning.

In other words, it is our job to find reasons to be excited about what we are doing.

However, one note based on expirience: This thing works much better if the meaning is a responsible one. I used to think that responsability was the opposite of freedom, but what I realized with this book is that freedom is a wide concept that has 2 sides of an spectrum, in one side is selfishness and in the other responsability. 

(ShowImage?)

The responsability side is the one you can use as an element to create your meaning, the side that let's you collaborate with what you have to give, transform your expiriences and your skills and put it at service.

Viktor exemplifies how once meaning is lost, the persue of immediate pleasure takes over. This means extreme smoking, drugs, overeating, etc...

So, after going through all that I was like.... ok, how can I contribute? How can I find meaning? They say that questions will focus your attention into finding answers... Because finding meaning is something I definelty want in my life.

What is meaning? I would say, simply, something to live for, something to work for. A reason. For me it's the story we make up ourself of **why** we are doing **what** we are doing. This **why** and **what** must be compelling enough.

As a software professional I have felt a little of this in the past, I hope you have too. For example, in Venezuela we proposed and implemented an online system for some pharmacies so people could find medications. It updated inventory information from every branch of a city for each of their 7,500 product catalog. Back when we implemented it about 8 years ago, medical shortage was a big thing in Venezuela, and it's worst each day. Now it's a tragedy, just check it out for youself: [http://www.farmaplus.com.ve/#!/products].

That project made little profit, but back then it helped a lot of people, and some years afterwards when we ourselves needed the service urgently we were very happy to have built it. From all the projects we developed back then, that one I always remember with particular satisfaction, like we contributed. It is still used a lot daily by thousands of people.

## Contrasting this with other more profitable projects

 We have built other systems and work for different companies after that. We had an ecommerce project for women handbags in which users could pick a color and color it's parts. Or another one where we helped cosmetic bottles and accesories distributors located in Miami, New Jersy and California to pick and quote cases of thousands of product using integrations to the wharehouses.

 Both project where very interesting to make, however the feeling is not the same, knowing that what you made is helping people who really need it just give another meaning.

So what to do in these cases? A B2B distributor for example? Well we focused our meaning on how this features could make the employees lives of the people who worked in Businesses better, their employees, people we interacted with, people that worked with us in the projects. Once we focused our meaning on serving them then it was a fullfilling experience.

## What you do infintly more important than how you do it
Ok, so this sentence I got from Tim Ferris and adopted it as a believe. We in the tech industry sometimes get so caught up on the perfect framework, the best methodology, the best language... Then we try to align our meaning to using this tools, and sometimes we can, but some times we force it.


Our Industry teachs us that success is more about going viral, or having a good paying job, or nailing it as consultant with a high rate per hour. 

We as human need this too, we need to have the need of certainty fulfilled, that we are going to be able to pay our bills, help our families, eat, have a roof, etc... Beleive me as a traveling inmigrant that can't return to his country because it's in a very bad shape, I know how important this is.

But once you have a minimum certainty, meaning goes a long way, or as authous such as Viktor have demostrated, meaning will give you beyon human strenght

----------------------------
Turns the main question that one would ask if you could go back in time and talk to these guys is Why? Why did you do all that? What motivated you? Well... each of them had different why's different meanings. The stronger the meaning the more challanges were able to overcome. The stories of these guys makes the pirates of the caribean look boring.

Was it will power? No, will power is very limited. Unconsciuos is incredible powerful. And it al comes to the meaning, to the why, and we can give ourself this meaning by fabricating our own story. Isn't that amazingly? I think it's more incredible then most scifi or fantasy stories. And it's real, and we all have it.

It's not even important how big or important to others is this meaning, it only matters how big or important it is for you. Your world is what it's really important. Viktor Frankl talked about people who's meaning was taking care of their son, sharing time with his partner, or helping a friend that was in the camp. Others like Viktor were able to create more meaning, as a neurologist and psychiatrist, he saw himself comunicating the message of healing through meaning.

Most of us are so confused because of years of publicity, social standards and other kind of influence, and also so out of touch with our own imagination that it's very hard to make up this story, to make up this meaning for ourselves. Humans by nature will go by the easiests path: buy someone else's fictional story. But many times the easiests path is fake.

Someone else's story is incomplete, it lacks definition, so we start borrowing pieces of other people stories, which conflict with each other, and create huge conflicts in ourselves, leaving our own story and sense of meaning empty.


There are some elements that make the sotry more compelling. One is making a responsible story. Being responsible is being free and caring at the same time, as opposed to free and selfish for example.

To build a meaning for yourself, strong enough to endure, it must be about contributing, and while building this meaning the self centereness will slowly go away, allowing a rich life.

So how does a selfcentered software profesional fabricates a story full with meaning? how might he use his acquired skill to contribute? Well this is my journey, this is the story we are living, this is how we are turning the direction of our boat.











